Acute kidney failure
Acute kidney injury (AKI), previously called acute renal failure (ARF),[10][11] is a rapidly progressive loss of renal function,[12] generally characterized by oliguria (decreased urine production, quantified as less than 400 mL per day in adults,[13] less than 0.5 mL/kg/h in children or less than 1 mL/kg/h in infants); and fluid and electrolyte imbalance. AKI can result from a variety of causes, generally classified as prerenal, intrinsic, and postrenal. Many people diagnosed with paraquat intoxication experience AKI, sometimes requiring hemodialysis.[citation needed] The underlying cause must be identified and treated to arrest the progress, and dialysis may be necessary to bridge the time gap required for treating these fundamental causes.

Acute-on-chronic kidney failure
Acute kidney injuries can be present on top of chronic kidney disease, a condition called acute-on-chronic kidney failure (AoCRF). The acute part of AoCRF may be reversible, and the goal of treatment, as with AKI, is to return the person to baseline kidney function, typically measured by serum creatinine. Like AKI, AoCRF can be difficult to distinguish from chronic kidney disease if the person has not been monitored by a physician and no baseline (i.e., past) blood work is available for comparison.

High levels of urea in the blood, which can result in:
Vomiting or diarrhea (or both) may lead to dehydration
Nausea
Weight loss
Nocturnal urination (nocturia)
More frequent urination, or in greater amounts than usual, with pale urine
Less frequent urination, or in smaller amounts than usual, with dark coloured urine
Blood in the urine
Pressure, or difficulty urinating
Unusual amounts of urination, usually in large quantities
A buildup of phosphates in the blood that diseased kidneys cannot filter out may cause:
Itching
Bone damage
Nonunion in broken bones
Muscle cramps (caused by low levels of calcium which can be associated with hyperphosphatemia)
A buildup of potassium in the blood that diseased kidneys cannot filter out (called hyperkalemia) may cause:
Abnormal heart rhythms
Muscle paralysis[19]
Failure of kidneys to remove excess fluid may cause:
Swelling of the hands, legs, ankles, feet, or face
Shortness of breath due to extra fluid on the lungs (may also be caused by anemia)
Polycystic kidney disease, which causes large, fluid-filled cysts on the kidneys and sometimes the liver, can cause:
Pain in the back or side
Healthy kidneys produce the hormone erythropoietin that stimulates the bone marrow to make oxygen-carrying red blood cells. As the kidneys fail, they produce less erythropoietin, resulting in decreased production of red blood cells to replace the natural breakdown of old red blood cells. As a result, the blood carries less hemoglobin, a condition known as anemia. This can result in:
Feeling tired or weak
Memory problems
Difficulty concentrating
Dizziness
Low blood pressure
Normally proteins are too large to pass through the kidneys. However they are able to pass through when the glomeruli are damaged. This does not cause symptoms until extensive kidney damage has occurred,[20] after which symptoms include:
Foamy or bubbly urine
Swelling in the hands, feet, abdomen, and face
Other symptoms include:
Appetite loss, which may include a bad taste in the mouth
Difficulty sleeping
Darkening of the skin
Excess protein in the blood
With high doses of penicillin, people with kidney failure may experience seizures[21]

Acute kidney injury (previously known as acute renal failure) – or AKI – usually occurs when the blood supply to the kidneys is suddenly interrupted or when the kidneys become overloaded with toxins. Causes of acute kidney injury include accidents, injuries, or complications from surgeries in which the kidneys are deprived of normal blood flow for extended periods of time. Heart-bypass surgery is an example of one such procedure.

Drug overdoses, accidental or from chemical overloads of drugs such as antibiotics or chemotherapy, bee stings[22] may also cause the onset of acute kidney injury. Unlike chronic kidney disease, however, the kidneys can often recover from acute kidney injury, allowing the person with AKI to resume a normal life. People suffering from acute kidney injury require supportive treatment until their kidneys recover function, and they often remain at increased risk of developing future kidney failure.[23]

Among the accidental causes of renal failure is the crush syndrome, when large amounts of toxins are suddenly released in the blood circulation after a long compressed limb is suddenly relieved from the pressure obstructing the blood flow through its tissues, causing ischemia. The resulting overload can lead to the clogging and the destruction of the kidneys. It is a reperfusion injury that appears after the release of the crushing pressure. The mechanism is believed to be the release into the bloodstream of muscle breakdown products – notably myoglobin, potassium, and phosphorus – that are the products of rhabdomyolysis (the breakdown of skeletal muscle damaged by ischemic conditions). The specific action on the kidneys is not fully understood, but may be due in part to nephrotoxic metabolites of myoglobin.

Failure has numerous causes. The most common causes of chronic failure are diabetes mellitus and long-term, uncontrolled hypertension.[24] Polycystic kidney disease is another well-known cause of chronic failure. The majority of people afflicted with polycystic kidney disease have a family history of the disease. Other genetic illnesses cause kidney failure, as well.

Overuse of common drugs such as ibuprofen, and acetaminophen (paracetamol) can also cause chronic kidney failure.[25]

Some infectious disease agents, such as hantavirus, can attack the kidneys, causing kidney failure.[26]

Genetic predisposition
The APOL1 gene has been proposed as a major genetic risk locus for a spectrum of nondiabetic renal failure in individuals of African origin, these include HIV-associated nephropathy (HIVAN), primary nonmonogenic forms of focal segmental glomerulosclerosis, and hypertension affiliated chronic kidney disease not attributed to other etiologies.[27] Two western African variants in APOL1 have been shown to be associated with end stage kidney disease in African Americans and Hispanic Americans.[28][29]


Stages of kidney failure
Chronic kidney failure is measured in five stages, which are calculated using the person's GFR, or glomerular filtration rate. Stage 1 CKD is mildly diminished renal function, with few overt symptoms. Stages 2 and 3 need increasing levels of supportive care from their medical providers to slow and treat their renal dysfunction. People with stage 4 and 5 kidney failure usually require preparation towards active treatment in order to survive. Stage 5 CKD is considered a severe illness and requires some form of renal replacement therapy (dialysis) or kidney transplant whenever feasible.

Glomerular filtration rate
A normal GFR varies according to many factors, including sex, age, body size and ethnic background. Renal professionals consider the glomerular filtration rate (GFR) to be the best overall index of kidney function.[30] The National Kidney Foundation offers an easy to use on-line GFR calculator[31] for anyone who is interested in knowing their glomerular filtration rate. (A serum creatinine level, a simple blood test, is needed to use the calculator.)

Use of the term uremia
Before the advancement of modern medicine, renal failure was often referred to as uremic poisoning. Uremia was the term for the contamination of the blood with urea. It is the presence of an excessive amount of urea in blood. Starting around 1847, this included reduced urine output, which was thought to be caused by the urine mixing with the blood instead of being voided through the urethra.[citation needed] The term uremia is now used for the illness accompanying kidney failure.



Overview
Chronic kidney disease, describes the gradual loss of kidney function, Your kidneys filter wastes and excess fluids from your blood, which are then excreted in your urine, When chronic kidney disease reaches an advanced stage, dangerous levels of fluid, electrolytes and wastes can build up in your body.

Symptoms :
Signs and symptoms of chronic kidney disease develop over time if kidney damage progresses slowly, Signs and symptoms of kidney disease may include:Nausea,Vomiting,
Loss of appetite,
Fatigue and weakness,
Sleep problems,
Changes in how much you urinate,
Decreased mental sharpness,
Muscle twitches and cramps,
Swelling of feet and ankles,
Persistent itching,
Chest pain, if fluid builds up around the lining of the heart,
Shortness of breath, if fluid builds up in the lungs,
High blood pressure (hypertension) that's difficult to control.

Causes :
Chronic kidney disease occurs when a disease or condition impairs kidney function, causing kidney damage to worsen over several months or years,

Diseases and conditions that cause chronic kidney disease include:

Type 1 or type 2 diabetes,
High blood pressure,
Glomerulonephritis, an inflammation of the kidney's filtering units,
Interstitial nephritis, an inflammation of the kidney's tubules and surrounding structures,
Polycystic kidney disease,
Prolonged obstruction of the urinary tract, from conditions such as enlarged prostate, kidney stones and some cancers,
Recurrent kidney infection.

Risk factors
Factors that may increase your risk of chronic kidney disease include:

Diabetes
High blood pressure
Heart and blood vessel (cardiovascular) disease
Smoking
Obesity
Being African-American, Native American or Asian-American
Family history of kidney disease
Abnormal kidney structure
Older age.

Complications :
Chronic kidney disease can affect almost every part of your body ,Potential complications may include:
Fluid retention, which could lead to swelling in your arms and legs, high blood pressure,
a sudden rise in potassium levels in your blood, which could impair your heart's ability to function and may be life-threatening,
Heart and blood vessel disease,
Weak bones and an increased risk of bone fractures,
Anemia
Decreased sex drive, erectile dysfunction or reduced fertility
Damage to your central nervous system.

Preventions :
The preventions to reduce your risk of developing kidney disease:

Follow instructions on over-the-counter medications,Maintain a healthy weight,Don't smoke, When using nonprescription pain relievers, such as aspirin, ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin IB, others) and acetaminophen (Tylenol, others), follow the instructions on the package. Taking too many pain relievers could lead to kidney damage and generally should be avoided if you have kidney disease. Ask your doctor whether these drugs are safe for you.
Maintain a healthy weight. If you're at a healthy weight, work to maintain it by being physically active most days of the week. If you need to lose weight, talk with your doctor about strategies for healthy weight loss. Often this involves increasing daily physical activity and reducing calories.
Don't smoke. Cigarette smoking can damage your kidneys and make existing kidney damage worse. If you're a smoker, talk to your doctor about strategies for quitting smoking. Support groups, counseling and medications can all help you to stop.
Manage your medical conditions with your doctor's help. 

Diagnosis :
Diagnosis of CKD is largely based on history, the diagnosis also include examination and urine dipstick combined with the measurement of the serum creatinine level (see above), It is important to differentiate CKD from acute kidney injury (AKI) because AKI can be reversible, One diagnostic clue that helps differentiate CKD from AKI is a gradual rise in serum creatinine (over several months or years) as opposed to a sudden increase in the serum creatinine (several days to weeks), In many people with CKD, previous kidney disease or other underlying diseases are already known, a significant number present with CKD of unknown cause.

Stages
Stage 1: Slightly diminished function; kidney damage with normal or relatively high GFR and persistent albuminuria, Kidney damage is defined as pathological abnormalities or markers of damage, including abnormalities in blood or urine tests or imaging studies,
Stage 2: Mild reduction in GFR with kidney damage, Kidney damage is defined as pathological abnormalities or markers of damage, including abnormalities in blood or urine tests or imaging studies,
Stage 3: Moderate reduction in GFR, British guidelines distinguish between stage 3A and stage 3B for purposes of screening and referral,
Stage 4: Severe reduction in GFR, Preparation for kidney replacement therapy,
Stage 5: Established kidney failure, permanent kidney replacement therapy, or end-stage kidney disease.

A glomerular filtration rate (GFR) ? 60 ml/min/1.73 m2 is considered normal without chronic kidney disease if there is no kidney damage present.

Kidney damage is defined signs of damage seen in blood, urine, or imaging studies which includes lab albumin/creatinine ratio (ACR) ? 30.[47] All people with a GFR <60 ml/min/1.73 m2 for 3 months are defined as having chronic kidney disease.[47]

Protein in the urine is regarded as an independent marker for worsening of kidney function and cardiovascular disease. Hence, British guidelines append the letter "P" to the stage of chronic kidney disease if protein loss is significant.[48]

The term "non-dialysis-dependent chronic kidney disease" (NDD-CKD) is a designation used to encompass the status of those persons with an established CKD who do not yet require the life-supporting treatments for kidney failure known as kidney replacement therapy (RRT, including maintenance dialysis or kidney transplantation). The condition of individuals with CKD, who require either of the two types of kidney replacement therapy (dialysis or transplant), is referred to as the end-stage kidney disease (ESKD). Hence, the start of the ESKD is practically the irreversible conclusion of the NDD-CKD. Even though the NDD-CKD status refers to the status of persons with earlier stages of CKD (stages 1 to 4), people with advanced stage of CKD (stage 5), who have not yet started kidney replacement therapy, are also referred to as NDD-CKD.

Management
Apart from controlling other risk factors, the goal of therapy is to slow down or halt the progression of CKD. Control of blood pressure and treatment of the original disease are the broad principles of management.

Blood pressure
Angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEIs) or angiotensin II receptor antagonists (ARBs) are recommended as first-line agents since they have been found to slow the decline of kidney function, relative to a more rapid decline in those not on one of these agents.[13] They have also been found to reduce the risk of major cardiovascular events such as myocardial infarction, stroke, heart failure, and death from cardiovascular disease when compared to placebo in individuals with CKD.[13] ACEIs may be superior to ARBs for protection against progression to kidney failure and death from any cause in those with CKD.[13] Aggressive blood pressure lowering decreases peoples risk of death.[49]

Other measures
Aggressive treatment of high blood lipids is recommended.[50]
A low-protein, low-salt diet may result in slower progression of CKD and reduction in proteinuria as well as controlling symptoms of advanced CKD to delay dialysis start.[51] A tailored low-protein diet, designed for low acidity, may help prevent damage to kidneys for people with CKD.[52]
Anemia - A target hemoglobin level of 9–12 g/dL is recommended;[53][54] raising hemoglobin levels to the normal range has not been found to be of benefit.[55]
Guidelines recommend treatment with parenteral iron prior to treatment with erythropoietin.
Replacement of erythropoietin is often necessary in people with advanced disease.[56]
It is unclear if androgens improve anemia.[57]
Calcitriol is recommended for vitamin D deficiency and control of metabolic bone disease.
Phosphate binders are used to control the serum phosphate levels, which are usually elevated in advanced chronic kidney disease.
Phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitors and zinc may improve sexual dysfunction in men.[30]
Referral to a nephrologist
Guidelines for referral to a nephrologist vary between countries. Most agree that nephrology referral is required by Stage 4 CKD (when eGFR/1.73m2 is less than 30 ml/min; or decreasing by more than 3 ml/min/year).[58]

It may also be useful at an earlier stage (e.g. CKD3) when urine albumin-to-creatinine ratio is more than 30 mg/mmol, when blood pressure is difficult to control, or when hematuria or other findings suggest either a primarily glomerular disorder or secondary disease amenable to specific treatment. Other benefits of early nephrology referral include proper education regarding options for kidney replacement therapy as well as pre-emptive transplantation, and timely workup and placement of an arteriovenous fistula in those people with chronic kidney disease opting for future hemodialysis.

Renal replacement therapy
At stage 5 CKD, kidney replacement therapy is usually required, in the form of either dialysis or a kidney transplant.

In CKD numerous uremic toxins accumulate in the blood. Even when ESKD (largely synonymous with CKD5) is treated with dialysis, the toxin levels do not go back to normal as dialysis is not that efficient. Similarly, after a kidney transplant, the levels may not go back to normal as the transplanted kidney may not work 100%. If it does, the creatinine level is often normal. The toxins show various cytotoxic activities in the serum and have different molecular weights, and some of them are bound to other proteins, primarily to albumin. Uremic toxins are classified into three groups as small water-soluble solutes, middle molecular-weight solutes, and protein-bound solutes.[59] Hemodialysis with high-flux dialysis membrane, long or frequent treatment, and increased blood/dialysate flow has improved removal of water-soluble small molecular weight uremic toxins. Middle molecular weight molecules are removed more effectively with hemodialysis using a high-flux membrane, hemodiafiltration and hemofiltration. However, conventional dialysis treatment is limited in its ability to remove protein-bound uremic toxins.

Prognosis :
CKD increases the risk of cardiovascular disease, and people with CKD often have other risk factors for heart disease, such as high blood lipids, The most common cause of death in people with CKD is cardiovascular disease rather than kidney failure,

Chronic kidney disease results in worse all-cause mortality (the overall death rate) which increases as kidney function decreases, The leading cause of death in chronic kidney disease is cardiovascular disease, regardless of whether there is progression to stage 5.

While kidney replacement therapies can maintain people indefinitely and prolong life, the quality of life is negatively affected, Kidney transplantation increases the survival of people with stage 5 CKD when compared to other options; however, it is associated with an increased short-term mortality due to complications of the surgery. Transplantation aside, high-intensity home hemodialysis appears to be associated with improved survival and a greater quality of life, when compared to the conventional three-times-a-week hemodialysis and peritoneal dialysis.[68]

People with ESKD are at increased overall risk for cancer.[69] This risk is particularly high in younger people and gradually diminishes with age.[69] Medical specialty professional organizations recommend that physicians do not perform routine cancer screening in people with limited life expectancies due to ESKD because evidence does not show that such tests lead to improved outcomes.


Chronic kidney disease was the cause of 956,000 deaths globally in 2013, up from 409,000 deaths in 1990.[19]

Race
African Americans, American Indians, Hispanics, and South Asians, particularly those from Pakistan, Sri Lanka, Bangladesh, and India, are at high risk of developing CKD. African Americans are at greater risk due to the number of people affected with hypertension among them. As an example, 37% of ESKD cases in African Americans can be attributed to high blood pressure, compared with 19% among Caucasians. Treatment efficacy also differs between racial groups. Administration of antihypertensive drugs generally halts disease progression in white populations but has little effect in slowing kidney disease among black people, and additional treatment such as bicarbonate therapy is often required.[75] While lower socioeconomic status contributes to the number of people affected with CKD, differences in the number of people affected by CKD are still evident between African Americans and Whites when controlling for environmental factors.[75]

Society and culture
The International Society of Nephrology is an international body representing specialists in kidney diseases.
if you haveThe American Kidney Fund is a national nonprofit organization providing treatment-related financial assistance to one of every five people undergoing dialysis each year.
The Renal Support Network is a nonprofit, patient-focused, patient-run organization that provides nonmedical services to those affected by CKD.
The American Association of Kidney Patients is a nonprofit, patient-centric group focused on improving the health and well-being of CKD and people undergoing dialysis .
The Renal Physicians Association is an association representing nephrology professionals.
United Kingdom
The UK National Kidney Federation and British Kidney Patient Association (BKPA) represents people with chronic kidney disease, *The Renal Association represents Kidney physicians and works closely with the National Service Framework for kidney disease.
Australia
Kidney Health Australia serves that country.
Other animals
The total rate of CKD in dogs was 16 cases per 10,000 years. The mortality rate of CKD was 10 deaths per 10,000. The breeds with the highest rates were the Bernese mountain dog, miniature schnauzer and boxer. The Swedish elkhound, Siberian husky and Finnish spitz were the breeds with the lowest rates.

Research:
Currently, on research point of view several compounds are in development for the treatment of CKD, This research include  the angiotensin receptor blocker (ARB) olmesartan medoxomil; and sulodexide, a mixture of low molecular weight heparin and dermatan sulfate,

Unbiased research with complete reporting is required to determine the safety and effectiveness of acupuncture to treat depression, pain, sleep problems, and uraemic pruritus in people who are undergoing dialysis treatments on a regular basis.

Screening
Screening those who have neither symptoms nor risk factors for CKD is not recommended.[41][42] Those who should be screened include: those with hypertension or history of cardiovascular disease, those with diabetes or marked obesity, those aged > 60 years, subjects with African American ancestry, those with a history of kidney disease in the past, and subjects who have relatives who had kidney disease requiring dialysis.

Screening should include calculation of the estimated GFR (eGFR) from the serum creatinine level, and measurement of urine albumin-to-creatinine ratio (ACR) in a first-morning urine specimen (this reflects the amount of a protein called albumin in the urine), as well as a urine dipstick screen for hematuria.[43]

The glomerular filtration rate (GFR) is derived from the serum creatinine and is proportional to 1/creatinine, i.e. it is a reciprocal relationship:the higher the creatinine, the lower the GFR. It reflects one aspect of kidney function: how efficiently the glomeruli - the filtering units - work. Normal GFR is 90-120 mLs/min. The units of creatinine vary from country to country. But since the glomeruli make up <5% of the mass of the kidney, the GFR does not indicate all aspects of kidney health and function. This can be done by combining the GFR level with the clinical assessment of the person, including fluid status, and measuring the levels of hemoglobin, potassium, phosphate and parathyroid hormone (PTH).

Ultrasound
Kidney ultrasonography is useful for diagnostic and prognostic purposes in chronic kidney disease. Whether the underlying pathologic change is glomerular sclerosis, tubular atrophy, interstitial fibrosis or inflammation, the result is often increased echogenicity of the cortex. The echogenicity of the kidney should be related to the echogenicity of either the liver or the spleen (Figure 22 and Figure 23). Moreover, decreased kidney size and cortical thinning are also often seen and especially when disease progresses (Figure 24 and Figure 25). However, kidney size correlates to height, and short persons tend to have small kidneys; thus, kidney size as the only parameter is not reliable.[44]

The three most common
 of CKD in order of frequency as of 2015 are diabetes mellitus, hypertension, and glomerulonephritis.[33] About one of five adults with hypertension and one of three adults with diabetes have CKD. If the cause is unknown, it is called idiopathic.[34]

By anatomical location
Vascular disease includes large vessel disease such as bilateral kidney artery stenosis and small vessel disease such as ischemic nephropathy, hemolytic-uremic syndrome, and vasculitis.
Glomerular disease comprises a diverse group and is classified into:
Primary glomerular disease such as focal segmental glomerulosclerosis and IgA nephropathy (or nephritis)
Secondary glomerular disease such as diabetic nephropathy and lupus nephritis
Tubulointerstitial disease includes drug- and toxin-induced chronic tubulointerstitial nephritis, and reflux nephropathy.
Obstructive nephropathy, as exemplified by bilateral kidney stones and benign prostatic hyperplasia of the prostate gland. Rarely, pinworms infecting the kidney can cause obstructive nephropathy.
Other
Congenital disease such as polycystic kidney disease.
Mesoamerican nephropathy, is "a new form of kidney disease that could be called agricultural nephropathy".[35] A high and so-far unexplained number of new cases of CKD, referred to as the Mesoamerican nephropathy, has been noted among male workers in Central America, mainly in sugar cane fields in the lowlands of El Salvador and Nicaragua. Heat stress from long hours of piece-rate work at high average temperatures[36][37][38][39] of about 36 °C (96 °F) is suspected, as are agricultural chemicals[40]

The three most common causes of CKD in order of frequency as of 2015 are diabetes mellitus, hypertension, and glomerulonephritis.[33] About one of five adults with hypertension and one of three adults with diabetes have CKD. If the cause is unknown, it is called idiopathic.[34]

By anatomical location
Vascular disease includes large vessel disease such as bilateral kidney artery stenosis and small vessel disease such as ischemic nephropathy, hemolytic-uremic syndrome, and vasculitis.
Glomerular disease comprises a diverse group and is classified into:
Primary glomerular disease such as focal segmental glomerulosclerosis and IgA nephropathy (or nephritis)
Secondary glomerular disease such as diabetic nephropathy and lupus nephritis
Tubulointerstitial disease includes drug- and toxin-induced chronic tubulointerstitial nephritis, and reflux nephropathy.
Obstructive nephropathy, as exemplified by bilateral kidney stones and benign prostatic hyperplasia of the prostate gland. Rarely, pinworms infecting the kidney can cause obstructive nephropathy.
Other
Congenital disease such as polycystic kidney disease.
Mesoamerican nephropathy, is "a new form of kidney disease that could be called agricultural nephropathy".[35] A high and so-far unexplained number of new cases of CKD, referred to as the Mesoamerican nephropathy, has been noted among male workers in Central America, mainly in sugar cane fields in the lowlands of El Salvador and Nicaragua. Heat stress from long hours of piece-rate work at high average temperatures[36][37][38][39] of about 36 °C (96 °F) is suspected, as are agricultural chemicals[40]


Blood pressure is increased due to fluid overload and production of vasoactive hormones created by the kidney via the renin–angiotensin system, increasing the risk of developing hypertension and heart failure.
Urea accumulates, leading to azotemia and ultimately uremia (symptoms ranging from lethargy to pericarditis and encephalopathy). Due to its high systemic concentration, urea is excreted in eccrine sweat at high concentrations and crystallizes on skin as the sweat evaporates ("uremic frost").
Potassium accumulates in the blood (hyperkalemia with a range of symptoms including malaise and potentially fatal cardiac arrhythmias). Hyperkalemia usually does not develop until the glomerular filtration rate falls to less than 20–25 ml/min/1.73 m2, at which point the kidneys have decreased ability to excrete potassium. Hyperkalemia in CKD can be exacerbated by acidemia (which leads to extracellular shift of potassium) and from lack of insulin.[20]
Fluid overload symptoms may range from mild edema to life-threatening pulmonary edema.
Hyperphosphatemia results from poor phosphate elimination in the kidney. Hyperphosphatemia contributes to increased cardiovascular risk by causing vascular calcification.[21] Circulating concentrations of fibroblast growth factor-23 (FGF-23) increase progressively as the kidney capacity for phosphate excretion declines which may contribute to left ventricular hypertrophy and increased mortality in people with CKD .[22][23]
Hypocalcemia results from 1,25 dihydroxyvitamin D3 deficiency (caused by high FGF-23 and reduced kidney mass)[24] and resistance to the action of parathyroid hormone.[25] Osteocytes are responsible for the increased production of FGF-23, which is a potent inhibitor of the enzyme 1-alpha-hydroxylase (responsible for the conversion of 25-hydroxycholecalciferol into 1,25 dihydroxyvitamin D3).[26] Later, this progresses to secondary hyperparathyroidism, kidney osteodystrophy, and vascular calcification that further impairs cardiac function. An extreme consequence is the occurrence of the rare condition named calciphylaxis.[27]
Changes in mineral and bone metabolism that may cause 1) abnormalities of calcium, phosphorus (phosphate), parathyroid hormone, or vitamin D metabolism; 2) abnormalities in bone turnover, mineralization, volume, linear growth, or strength (kidney osteodystrophy); and 3) vascular or other soft-tissue calcification.[10] CKD-mineral and bone disorders have been associated with poor outcomes.[10]
Metabolic acidosis may result from decreased capacity to generate enough ammonia from the cells of the proximal tubule.[20] Acidemia affects the function of enzymes and increases excitability of cardiac and neuronal membranes by the promotion of hyperkalemia.[28]
Anemia is common and is especially prevalent in those requiring haemodialysis. It is multifactoral in cause, but includes increased inflammation, reduction in erythropoietin, and hyperuricemia leading to bone marrow suppression.

In later stages, cachexia may develop, leading to unintentional weight loss, muscle wasting, weakness and anorexia.[29]
Sexual dysfunction is very common in both men and women with CKD. A majority of men have a reduced sex drive, difficulty obtaining an erection, and reaching orgasm, and the problems get worse with age. A majority of women have trouble with sexual arousal, and painful menstruation and problems with performing and enjoying sex are common.[30]
People with CKD are more likely than the general population to develop atherosclerosis with consequent cardiovascular disease, an effect that may be at least partly mediated by uremic toxins.[31][unreliable medical source?] People with both CKD and cardiovascular disease have significantly worse prognoses than those with only cardiovascular disease.[32]



